Metrics Improvements (#67)
kroxylicious/design: proposals/003-metric-improvements.md

* *1 - these metrics aren't discriminated by ApiKey (etc.). This limits their usefulness for problem-solving.
* *2 - the metric name is quite misleading - nothing tells the user that it is only recording the sizes of RPCs that are actually **decoded**.
* *2 - there are no quantised buckets configured for this metric. it gives the user count/sum/max values only. it would be
  hard to use this metric to understand something about produce requests or fetch responses.
* *1 / *2 - we have contradictory meanings for the `flowing` label.  in *2, requests flow `UPSTREAM`, responses flow `DOWNSTREAM`.
  In *1 requests flow `DOWNSTREAM` which makes no sense.
* *3 - downstream errors does not record account for errors such as TLS negotiation errors or failures to determine virtual cluster or broker.  

### General short-comings/weaknesses

* The metrics endpoint populates `HELP` for each metric, but this is populated with nothing more than the metric's name.
  We ought to be giving a clear description of the metric.
* Some of the label names don't follow Prometheus naming conventions.  Prometheus recommends snake case whereas we have used camel case in some cases.

> * Some of the metrics names aren't too clear.  For instance, the word payload has defined meaning in the [Kafka Protocol Guide](https://kafka.apache.org/protocol).

Reviewer: I can't spot `payload` mentioned in the protocol doc linked, there are a couple of mentions in the kafka doc though:

```
design.html
565:    Compaction also allows for deletes. A message with a key and a null payload will be treated as a delete from the log. Such a record is sometimes referred to as a <i>tombstone</i>. This delete marker will cause any prior message with that key to be removed (as would any new
```

and a few usages of payload in the kafka clients code, so yeah it's overloaded

Author: > 565:    Compaction also allows for deletes. A message with a key and a null payload will be treated...

ha - that's wrong.   They actually mean `value`.

* filters have the ability to change the size of the RPCs as they traverse the proxy (record encryption)
* filters have the ability to change the flow of messages within the Kafka system. Specifically, they can short-circuit
  requests by producing their own responses (the broker never sees the request) and introduce their own requests.
* filters can perform asynchronous work.  When asynchronous work occurs, the proxy stops reading the downstream or upstream.

## Proposal

### Summary

The following metrics will be added.  They will each be described in more detail later in this section.

| Metric                                              | Type         | Labels                                                      | Description                                                                                                                        |
|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | kroxylicious_client_to_proxy_request_total          | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, decoded     | Incremented by one every time a **request** arrives at the proxy from the downstream (client).                                     |

Reviewer 2: I'm 100% on board if everyone is happy with the prefix, I was floating the thought in case someone else thought it important.

> | kroxylicious_proxy_to_broker_request_total          | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, decoded     | Incremented by one every time a **request**† goes from the proxy to the upstream (broker).                                         |

Reviewer 3: +1

| kroxylicious_filter_to_broker_request_total         | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, filter_name | Incremented by one every time a **filter-initiated request** goes from the proxy to the upstream (broker).                         |
| kroxylicious_broker_to_filter_response_total        | Counter      | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, filter_name | Incremented by one every time a **response** for a **filter-initiated request** arrives at the proxy from the upstream (broker).   |
|                                                     |              |                                                             |                                                                                                                                    |
| kroxylicious_filter_to_broker_request_size_bytes    | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, filter_name | Records the message size of every **filter-initiated request** goes from the proxy to the upstream (broker).                       |

> | kroxylicious_broker_to_fiter_response_size_bytes    | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, filter_name | Records the message size of every **response** for a **filter-initiated request** arrives at the proxy from the upstream (broker). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| kroxylicious_broker_to_filter_response_size_bytes    | Distribution | virtual_cluster, node_id, api_key, api_version, filter_name | Records the message size of every **response** for a **filter-initiated request** arrives at the proxy from the upstream (broker). |
```

The following metrics wil have changes to their labels.

| Metric                                    | Type    | Labels                   | Deprecated Labels | Description                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------|---------|--------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| kroxylicious_downstream_connections_total | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Incremented by one every time a request comes from/response goes to the downstream. |
| kroxylicious_downstream_error_total       | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Incremented by one every time a request goes to/response comes from the upstream.   |
| kroxylicious_upstream_connections_total   | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Incremented by one every time a request comes from/response goes to the downstream. |

> | kroxylicious_upstream_error_total         | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

Reviewer: the descriptions of these look wrong.

* the `*error_total` descriptions don't mention errors. 
* the `*connections_total` descriptions talk about requests, but I guess it's supposed to count established connections

Reviewer 3: `the *connections_total descriptions talk about requests, but I guess it's supposed to count established connections` 

Iam not sure but doesn't this increment even if the connection fails?(Based of my understanding)

Author: Yes, there is a typo (request vs connection) and it is under specified.

It is a `connection_total` so I guess the intent was for it to count all connections, even those that are short lived due to error.  @SamBarker was that the intent?

> | kroxylicious_upstream_error_total         | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

Reviewer 4: Sgtm

> | kroxylicious_upstream_error_total         | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

Author: @ShubhamRwt @SamBarker WDYT?

> | kroxylicious_upstream_error_total         | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

Reviewer 2: `kroxylicious_client_connections_total` I feel like I'm losing this fight, but I think `client_connections` is ambiguous is it clients connecting to the proxy or the proxy connecting to the upstream broker? `downstream` and `upstream` are ambiguous.

> | kroxylicious_upstream_error_total         | Counter | virtual_cluster, node_id | virtualCluster    | Records the time taken for the message to traverse the proxy                        |

Author: I could live with those suggested by @robobario

The labels are defined as follows:

| Label           | Definition                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| virtual_cluster | Name of virtual cluster.  Label omitted if the virtual cluster has not been established‡.                                                                                 |

> | node_id         | Numeric node_id of the broker being communicated with. the value `bootstrap` is used for bootstrapping interactions. Label omitted if the node has not been established‡. |

Reviewer 2: Because as I said in the original comment we don't currently virtualise the node id, so it could be considered misleading.

| api_key         | API key of the kafka message e.g. PRODUCE                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                               |
| api_version     | Numeric API version of the message.                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                               |

> | decoded         | Flag indicating if the proxy decoded the message or not (1 = decoded, 0 = not decoded)                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                               |

Author: I was being influenced by https://www.robustperception.io/booleans-logic-and-math/

> | decoded         | Flag indicating if the proxy decoded the message or not (1 = decoded, 0 = not decoded)                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                               |

Author: You are right, I was conflating the two things in my mind.  I can't find any best practice for the domain of boolean labels, so I think you are right.  string true and false will more clear.

The following metrics will be deprecated.

| Metric                                           |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_messages         |
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages |
| kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes                  |

† Requests generated by Filter API's `sendRequest`, and their responses, are not accounted for by these metric

‡ This happens only in the case of connection to gateways using "SNI identifies broker" where the connection fails TLS negotiation or the SNI name is unrecognised.

### New counters `kroxylicious_<A>_to_<B>_request_total` and `kroxylicious_<A>_to_<B>_response_total`

Counts the number of request/responses flowing between point A and point B.

Use cases that were previously served by the deprecated metrics `kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_messages` and
`kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages` can now use these metric instead.

In the case where a filter **short-circuits** a request and provides its own response, `client_to_proxy_request_total` will tick

> but `kroxylicious_proxy_to_broker_request_total` will not.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should consider a specific counter, or `short_circuit` label on `kroxylicious_proxy_to_client_response_total`. Something users can look at to convince themselves this accounts for the discrepancy in and out.

Author: I've recorded this in the out-of-scope section.

The `kroxylicious_filter_to_broker_request_total` and `kroxylicious_broker_to_filter_response_total` are used exclusively
for `FilerContext#sendRequest` interactions.  The `kroxylicious_proxy_to_broker_request_total` and
`kroxylicious_broker_to_proxy_response_total` do not tick for these use-cases.

### New distributions `kroxylicious_<A>_to_<B>_request_size_bytes` and `kroxylicious_<A>_to_<B>_response_size_bytes`

Records the sizes of request/responses flowing between point A and point B.

Use cases that were previously served by the deprecated metric `kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes` can now use this metric
instead. The new metric records the size of both **opaque** and **decoded** messages allowing the user to understand the
number of bytes traversing the proxy.

In the case where a filter causes a request (or request) to expand, this will be evident from the metrics. `kroxylicious_client_to_proxy_request_size_bytes`
will record the size when the request arrived and `kroxylicious_proxy_to_broker_request_size_bytes` will record its new
encoded size as it leaves.  The same thing will happen from responses.   This will allow the effect of adding filters

> such as the Record Encryption (where produce request sizes will change) to be understood.

Author: I've noted this in the proposal.

### New distributions `kroxylicious_client_to_broker_request_transit_time` and `kroxylicious_broker_to_client_response_transit_time`

> These metric records the length of time a message (request or response) has taken to transit the proxy.

Reviewer 2: No not called out here, called out in the docs for our metrics.

> These metric records the length of time a message (request or response) has taken to transit the proxy.

Author: > What about requests which don't complete? I.e. they fail with an exception hmm maybe they will be caught when we close the channel.

yeah - I can imagine there are some gaps.  We are not thinking about filters that fail (or filter that close the channel) at the moment.

> I think we should document this as a elapsed time rather than active processing time. I.e if a request stalls while waiting for a KEK to refresh.

we do impose a timeout on async filter work already (20s) io/kroxylicious/proxy/internal/KafkaProxyFrontendHandler.java:626

I was imagining ticking the metric as the upstream/downstream write finishes.  I'm not sure how I'd use metrics to capture a growing elapsed time.

> Should make sure we have the Pause time metric available and call it out here.

By pause time, do you mean the auto-read thing?

> These metric records the length of time a message (request or response) has taken to transit the proxy.

Reviewer 2: >I was imagining ticking the metric as the upstream/downstream write finishes. I'm not sure how I'd use metrics to capture a growing elapsed time.

Yes, that is going to capture elapsed time isn't it? 

1. Request arrives
2. timer starts
3. reaches record encryption filter
4. KEK not found in cache - cache load triggered
5. request waits for KEK to load
6. kek loads
7. request encrypted
8. request passes the rest of the filter chain
9. request written to socket
10. timer stopped

The time tracked is the time that elapsed between the request arriving and leaving, but its not the time that the proxy actually spent working on the request.

    * [Specific metric for short circuit responses](#specific-metric-for-short-circuit-responses)
    * [Specific metric for filters that drop connections or suffer an exception](#specific-metric-for-filters-that-drop-connections-or-suffer-an-exception)
    * [Dedicated API for Filter specific metrics](#dedicated-api-for-filter-specific-metrics)
  * [Compatibility](#compatibility)
  * [Rejected alternatives](#rejected-alternatives)
  * [Implementation Schedule](#implementation-schedule)
    * [Essential](#essential)
    * [Highly Desirable](#highly-desirable)
    * [Deferred until Later](#deferred-until-later)
<!-- TOC -->

## Current situation

Currently, the proxy emits the following metrics:

| Metric                                           | Type         | Labels                                      | Description                                                                                                         |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_messages         | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one every time every inbound RPC arriving _from the downstream only_. (*1)                           |
> | kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one every time every inbound RPC arriving _from the downstream that the proxy needs to decode_. (*1) |
> | kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes                  | Distribution | flowing, virtualCluster, ApiKey, ApiVersion | Incremented with RPC's frame size for every _decoded_ RPC from either the _downstream or upstream_. (*2)            |
> | kroxylicious_downstream_connections              | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one each time a connection arrives from the downstream                                               |
> | kroxylicious_downstream_errors                   | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one each time a connection fails owning to a downstream error (dropped connection) (*3)              |
> | kroxylicious_upstream_connections_attempts       | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one each time a connection attempt to made to the upstream.                                          |
> | kroxylicious_upstream_errors                     | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one each time a connection attempt fails owning to a upstream error (tls negotiation etc)            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_message          | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one every time every inbound RPC arriving _from the downstream only_. (*1)                           |
| kroxylicious_inbound_downstream_decoded_messages | Counter      | flowing, virtualCluster                     | Incremented by one every time every inbound RPC arriving _from the downstream that the proxy needs to decode_. (*1) |
| kroxylicious_payload_size_bytes                  | Distribution | flowing, virtualCluster, ApiKey, ApiVersion | Incremented with RPC's frame size for every _decoded_ RPC from either the _downstream or upstream_. (*2)            |
| kroxylicious_downstream_connections              | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time a connection arrives from the downstream                                               |
| kroxylicious_downstream_errors                   | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time a connection fails owning to a downstream error (dropped connection) (*3)              |
| kroxylicious_upstream_connections                | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time a connection is established to the upstream and the proxy is ready to forward data.    |
| kroxylicious_upstream_connection_attempts        | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time a connection attempt to made to the upstream.                                          |
| kroxylicious_upstream_connection_failures        | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time a connection attempt terminates exceptionally.                                         |
| kroxylicious_upstream_errors                     | Counter      | virtualCluster                              | Incremented by one each time an upstream connection terminates exceptionally, whether it's connecting or not        |
```

A couple are were missing

| api_version     | Numeric API version of the message.                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                               |
| decoded         | Flag indicating if the proxy decoded the message or not (true = decoded, false = not decoded)                                                                               |                                                                                                                                               |
| filter_name     | Name of the filter that initiated the request                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                               |

**#3** This happens only in the case of connection to gateways using "SNI Identifies Node" where the connection fails TLS negotiation or the SNI name is unrecognised.

> The following metrics will be deprecated.

Reviewer: I think this list needs to be expanded to list all existing metrics
